---
title: "Announcing MKLab"
date: 2025-03-24
categories: [Announcements]
---

With over 30 years of experience in the IT industry, I have dedicated the last 17 years to Microsoft, collaborating with esteemed colleagues and working with some of the world's largest and most innovative companies. Throughout my career, I have witnessed the rapid emergence and disappearance of various technologies. I had the honour of contributing to the development of Microsoft's cloud platform, Azure, as part of the Microsoft Azure Incubation Team, where I successfully persuaded customers of the reliability and potential of Cloud Computing. More recently, I have been actively engaged in the AI revolution, observing its profound impact on industries and individuals.

This journey has been remarkable, filled with continuous learning and adaptation. Now, influenced by unforeseen circumstances, I am departing from a company that I have cherished for nearly one-third of my life to embark on my own entrepreneurial venture.

> I'm proud to announce MKLab

I am pleased to announce MKLab, where I will offer my expertise and experience to a new array of clients and projects. As an independent principal consultant, I will focus my efforts and engagements on:

* Leadership and Coaching
* Technical Program and Agile Project Management
* Software Engineering and IT Architecture

In addition to my technical expertise, I take pride in my strong social and leadership skills, which I will bring to my company and the clients I collaborate with. Microsoft's principles for managers: to be role models; to coach; and to care; have always been significant to me, and I intend to carry those values into my company and in my interactions with clients. I am committed to ensuring that everyone I work with feels valued, not only in terms of business but also on a personal level.

> Photography is not just a skill for me; it is a true passion

For those familiar with my background, you might also know about my deep passion and expertise in media and photography. I am genuinely enthusiastic about these fields and excited to offer my assistance to you or your company in these areas as well. Photography is not just a skill for me; it is a true passion, and I would be delighted to consider any related assignments.

> If you need expertise with a personal touch

If you need expertise with a personal touch, contact me to discuss how I can support your business. I look forward to this new adventure and working with great clients.


-Kristofer Liljeblad, Founder of MKLab